Authentication guide (#6816)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/authentication.mdx

---
title: Authentication
description: An intro to authentication in Astro
i18nReady: true
---

import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro'

Authentication and authorization are two security processes that help you control who has access to different parts of your website or app. Authentication is the process of verifying a vistor's identity, and authorization is the process of allowing visitors access to protected routes and resources.

For example, it is possible to set up *authorization* to view a private page on your site by requiring a password. However, if the page does not contain any personal or sensitive information (e.g. a static page with additional content available only to those who know the password), you might not include any *authentication*.

Authentication provides the most security for you and your visitors, and allows you to customize areas of your site for logged-in individuals.

> Use a trusted authentication library (e.g. [Lucia Auth](https://lucia-auth.com/), [Auth.js](https://authjs.dev/)) whenever sensitive information is involved. Authentication libraries provide utilities for multiple authentication methods, such as email signin and OAuth providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a trusted authentication library (e.g. [Lucia Auth](https://lucia-auth.com/), [Auth.js](https://authjs.dev/)) to protect sensitive information in your Astro site. Authentication libraries provide utilities for multiple authentication methods such as email sign-in and OAuth providers.
```

Perhaps this could sound more "actionable"?
\+ some refactoring

:::tip
You can find [community "auth" integrations](https://astro.build/integrations/?search=auth) in the integrations directory.

> :::

Reviewer: Perhaps this could be a `<ReadMore>` component?

Reviewer 2: Not a ReadMore since it points to the catalog, not more to actually "read", I don't think!

## Lucia

> Lucia is a framework agnostic, session based authentication library with great Astro support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lucia is a framework-agnostic, session-based authentication library with great Astro support.
```
The hyphen discussion arises once more ;-;

### Installation

You can install Lucia using the package manager of your choice.

<PackageManagerTabs>
  <Fragment slot="npm">
  ```shell
  npm install lucia
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="pnpm">
  ```shell
  pnpm add lucia
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="yarn">
  ```shell
  yarn add lucia
  ```
  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

### Configuration

Use [Lucia's "Getting started in Astro"](https://lucia-auth.com/getting-started/astro) guide to initialize Lucia with an adapter and set up a database to store users and sessions.

### Usage

> :::tip
> Follow one of Lucia's complete Astro tutorials to add [username and password authentication](https://lucia-auth.com/tutorials/username-and-password/astro) or [GitHub OAuth](https://lucia-auth.com/tutorials/username-and-password/astro) to your Astro project.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow one of Lucia's complete Astro tutorials to add [username and password authentication](https://lucia-auth.com/tutorials/username-and-password/astro) or [GitHub OAuth](https://lucia-auth.com/tutorials/username-and-password/astro) to your Astro project.
```

This may not need to be an aside, as it directly relates to the process

Reviewer 2: Admittedly, we're working on the best way to handle this, since Lucia has great guides and there isn't a lot of need for us to reproduce here. So, is it part of the process to "go do their tutorial?"  😅

Reviewer: > Admittedly, we're working on the best way to handle this, since Lucia has great guides and there isn't a lot of need for us to reproduce here. So, is it part of the process to "go do their tutorial?" 😅

Yeah, I think so! Don't have to fix whats not broken, as well

### Next Steps

- [Example Astro + Lucia OAuth project](https://github.com/lucia-auth/examples/tree/main/astro/github-oauth)

> - [Example Astro + Lucia username and password project](https://github.com/lucia-auth/examples/tree/main/astro/username-and-password)

Reviewer: `<ReadMore>` here too? Maybe I just like this component too much :P

Reviewer 2: Same thing, these aren't actually more things to "read" as they are example projects.

  <Fragment slot="npm">
  ```shell
  npx astro add auth-astro
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="pnpm">
  ```shell
  pnpm astro add auth-astro
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="yarn">
  ```shell
  yarn astro add auth-astro
  ```
  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

#### Manual installation

First, install the required packages:

<PackageManagerTabs>
  <Fragment slot="npm">
  ```shell
  npm install auth-astro
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="pnpm">
  ```shell
  pnpm add auth-astro @auth/core
  ```
  </Fragment>
  <Fragment slot="yarn">
  ```shell
  yarn add auth-astro
  ```
  </Fragment>
</PackageManagerTabs>

Then, apply the integration to your `astro.config.*` file using the `integrations` property:

```ts title="astro.config.mjs" ins={2,6}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import auth from 'auth-astro';

export default defineConfig({
  // ...
  integrations: [auth()],
});
```

### Configuration

Create an `auth.config.mjs` file in your project's root directory. Add any auth [providers](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/providers) or methods you wish to support, along with any environment variables they require.

```ts title="auth.config.mjs"

> import GitHub from '@auth/core/providers/github'
> import { defineConfig } from 'auth-astro'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import GitHub from '@auth/core/providers/github';
import { defineConfig } from 'auth-astro';
```
Sorry to nit x_x

export default defineConfig({
	providers: [
		GitHub({
			clientId: import.meta.env.GITHUB_CLIENT_ID,
			clientSecret: import.meta.env.GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET,
		}),
	],

> })

Reviewer: ```suggestion
});
```

```

Add two additional environment variables. `AUTH_SECRET` should be a private string with a minimum of 32 characters.

```sh
AUTH_TRUST_HOST=true
AUTH_SECRET=<my-auth-secret>
```

### Usage

You can add sign-in and sign-out buttons using the `auth-astro/client` module in a script tag or client-side framework component.

> ```astro title="src/pages/index.ts"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
```

---

> import Layout from 'src/layouts/Base.astro'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import Layout from 'src/layouts/Base.astro';
```

---
<Layout>
  <button id="login">Login</button>
  <button id="logout">Logout</button>

  <script>
    const { signIn, signOut } = await import("auth-astro/client")
    document.querySelector("#login").onclick = () => signIn("github")
    document.querySelector("#logout").onclick = () => signOut()
  </script>
</Layout>
```

You can fetch the user's session using the `getSession` method.

> ```astro title="src/pages/index.ts"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
```

---
import Layout from 'src/layouts/Base.astro'

> import { getSession } from 'auth-astro/server';

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
import { getSession } from 'auth-astro/server'
```

Reviewer: I believe this should be the other way around. Semicolons for days!

Reviewer 3: I also prefer semicolons but I suggested without because the rest of the code examples don't use them (for consistency).

Reviewer: > I also prefer semicolons but I suggested without because the rest of the code examples don't use them (for consistency).

That makes sense! The documentation tends to (and should) include semicolons in code examples, and part of my fight is finding instances where this is not true! :)

> import Layout from 'src/layouts/Base.astro'
> import { getSession } from 'auth-astro/server';
> 
> const session = await getSession(Astro.request)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import Layout from 'src/layouts/Base.astro';
import { getSession } from 'auth-astro/server';

const session = await getSession(Astro.request);
```

---
<Layout>
  {
    session ? (
      <p>Welcome {session.user?.name}</p>
    ) : (
      <p>Not logged in</p>
    )
  }
</Layout>
```

### Next Steps

More information about `auth-astro` and Auth.js can be found in the following links:

- [`auth-astro` on GitHub](https://github.com/nowaythatworked/auth-astro?tab=readme-ov-file#auth-astro)

> - [Auth.js documentation](https://authjs.dev/)

Reviewer: These could also be `<ReadMore>`s!
